### TODO
* Find DEA citation

### Economist Notes
In 2015, the most recent year for which full statistics are available, 33,091
Americans died from opioid overdoses, according to the Centres for Disease
Control—almost three times the number who perished in 2002. Nearly as many
Americans were killed by opioids in 2015 as were killed by guns (36,132) or in
car crashes (35,092).

Opioids can be divided into three broad groups. First, and most notorious, are
legitimate painkillers such as OxyContin. Heavily prescribed from the 1990s,
some of these pills were abused by people who defeated their slow-release
mechanisms by crushing and then snorting or injecting them. The second group
consists of powerful synthetic opioids such as fentanyl and carfentanil. These
have legitimate medical uses, but are often manufactured illicitly and smuggled
into America. The third opioid is heroin, derived from opium poppies, almost all
of it illegally.

In the past few years, though, heroin and synthetic opioids have become bigger
threats (see chart 1). Some addicts have moved from one class of opioid to
another. The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) estimates that almost four
out of five new heroin users previously abused prescription drugs.

Addicts west of the Mississippi mostly use Mexican brown-powder or black-tar
heroin, which is sticky and viscous, whereas eastern users favour Colombian
white-powder heroin. According to the DEA, in 2014 over 90% of samples
classified as South American heroin were seized east of the Mississippi, while
97% of Mexican heroin was purchased to the west.

White-powder heroin looks much like a crushed pain pill, making it comparatively
easy to switch from one to the other. It is also fairly easy to mix white-powder
heroin with a powder such as fentanyl.


### CDC notes

Providers wrote nearly a quarter of a billion opioid prescriptions in 2013—with
wide variation across states. This is enough for every American adult to have
their own bottle of pills.1

To reverse this epidemic, we need to improve the way we treat pain. We must
prevent abuse, addiction, and overdose before they start.


### NEJM

These efforts include educating health professionals and the public about
appropriate use, implementing prescription-drug monitoring programs, taking
enforcement and regulatory actions to address egregious prescribing (e.g.,
eliminating “pill mills”), and developing prescription opioids that incorporate
abuse-deterrent technologies.

Some researchers suggest that the very policies and practices that have been
designed to address inappropriate prescribing are now fueling the increases in
rates of heroin use and death.
http://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMc1204141

A key underlying characteristic of the epidemic is the association between the
increasing rate of opioid prescribing and increasing opioid-related morbidity
and mortality. 

Muhuri et al. found that the incidence of heroin use among people who reported
prior nonmedical use of prescription opioids was 19 times as high as the
incidence among persons who reported no previous nonmedical use.

By the time they initiate heroin use, usually through contact with drug users,
sexual partners, or drug dealers, they view heroin as reliably available, more
potent, easier to manipulate for nonoral routes, and more cost-effective than
prescription opioids.34-36,38-41

In the context of marked increases in the rates of heroin use, it is important
to note that only a small percentage of nonmedical users of prescription opioids
initiate heroin use. Muhuri and colleagues found that 3.6% of nonmedical users
initiated heroin use within 5 years after beginning nonmedical use of
prescription opioids

1. IMS Health, National Prescription Audit (NPATM). Cited in internal document: Preliminary Update on Opioid Pain Reliever (OPR) Prescription Rates Nationally and by State: 2010-2013.

## New Jersey

NJ AG Porrino is also calling for new regulations that limit pharma companies'
contributions to doctors who prescribe opioids.



